---
title: "Review of Clean Code (2008) by Robert C. Martin"
---

This is my short review of the software engineering classic <it>Clean Code</it> by Robert C. Martin, a classic book with the tagline <it>A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship.</it> As a programmer writing Object Oriented code in C++ in a culture influenced by Test Driven Design, it was a natural choice for me to read one of the most popular books on software engineering from this corner of the tech world.  

## Main takeaways 

The book is an interesting work and based on the significant experience of the author and contributors.
I am going to summarize my three main takeaways in this section.

* The Boy Scout Rule: <it>Leave the code cleaner than when you found it.</it>

This is one of my favorite rules for software engineering because of its simplicity and effectiveness, and I apply it whenever I can. Fixing small things in code when spotted, like typos, comments, dead code or identifier names, can have a major effect when applied systematically to a codebase. It keeps the need for expensive refactoring efforts at bay and avoids the "rot" that often happens as code ages. 

* The three laws of TDD
1. You may not write production code until you have written a failing unit test
2. You may not write more of a unit test than is sufficient to fail
3. You may not write more production code than is sufficient to pass the currently failing test

While the cult of TDD is not as prevalent as it once was, I have found that the process of writing tests and code in this back-and-forth manner leads to cleaner code. It is also a simple way to organize the work around a feature without getting lost or attempting to implement too much at once. This is summarized in another simple rule that I have suffered the result of any times: <it> If it's not tested, it's broken. </it>

* One level of abstraction in a function

This rule was less obvious to me, but has proven very effective when writing more complex functionality. When considering that a function should read top-to-bottom in a logical and coherent way, the refactoring of a large top-level function into smaller, cohesive parts comes quite naturally. In addition, when this method is used, the names of the functions seem to be quite obvious as well. 

## Main Criticisms

I am going to summarize three of my criticisms of the book in this section.

* Use of hidden state in the refactored examples

This is my biggest gripe with the book. Many of the refactorings see to that the local variables of the larger, messy functions end up as private variables modified by private methods. This hidden flow of state between methods in the form of private variables is something I view as very obfuscating and a potential source of bugs. The more modern approach of zero-tolerance of hidden control flow and minimizing state is a major improvement over this, in my opinion.   

* Over-use of private functions

In many of the refactoring examples, e.g. the refactoring of the FitNesse code, a large part of the refactoring is the splitting of public methods into a multitude of private functions. Some of these functions also modify the class' private variables, which in my opinion is a major source of bugs: The surprising mutation of state by a seemingly innocent helper function can give considerable headache. Helper functions should next to never modify the object's  state, in my opinion. As a C++ programmer, I rarely write private functions (especially non-const functions), but often write funtions in the anonymous namespace. This is the approach that I would advise. 

* Contributions from multiple authors resulted in an inconsistent style

While contributions from multiple sources is a plus for giving a nuanced view and keeping the book interesing, it has resulted in an uneven style with heterogeneous chapters. It appears that the editorial oversight was absent in improving the consistency of style, which is apparent in e.g. different structure of the chapters, use of the conclusion section etc.

## Review summary

In conclusion, I would advise software engineers writing in an Object Oriented and/or Test Driven style to read or skim through the book. However, I would take the code examples with a grain of salt, as well as skip the last chapters. It contains a number of good rules and perspectives, especially when it comes to Test Driven Design (TDD), but the style is somewhat outdated and may best be supplemented with a more modern and hybrid design approach, in my opinion.
